---
title: Introduction and Methodology
author: Christina Hotalen
layout: collection
permalink: /dissertation/introduction
collection: top_pages
sidebar:
  nav: "sidebar_nav"
---

Romans living during the third century were plagued by barbarian invasions and political instability. Definitions of what it meant to be a Roman were turned upside down when Caracalla extended citizenship to all freeborn individuals in 212 CE. Christianity and other mystery religions challenged the dominance of imperial and local cults.  In the midst of such cultural turmoil, ancient literary sources concerned themselves primarily with political and military affairs. These sources were largely uninterested in imperial women except for matters of succession, or when the empress was suspected of scheming to hold onto power. Scholarship on this period follows the outlines of ancient literary sources, largely interested in political transformation, transition, and decline, while studies of imperial women are sparse.  Because of the scanty and unreliable nature of literary sources for this period, some scholars have turned to numismatic evidence in order to flesh out the historical narrative.  Coinage is also the best evidence for imperial women of the period, particularly for reconstructing imperial propaganda. Before proceeding further, it is necessary that I define propaganda. Modern notions of propaganda define it as information that is intended to be misleading and false. It would be anachronistic to employ modern notions of propaganda in the context of antiquity. Imperial propaganda is based on selective information that presents the emperor in the best light and was not misleading nor false.

I begin with the presumption that imperial women likely did not manage their own images in official media but appeared at the pleasure of the emperor and his agenda. I explore the propagandistic messages about three imperial women in official media: Julia Domna, Otacilia Severa and Galeria Valeria. I will demonstrate that the empresses’ titles, personal appearance, and identities were marshalled by the imperial administration to secure the emperor’s legitimacy with targeted audiences. Different populations responded to imperial propaganda, a process by which both parties negotiated agreed-upon truths concerning the past, the present, and the future of the dynasty and the Empire.  Imperial women serve as case studies for the negotiation of ideology because they encouraged subjects to play an active role in participating and maintaining a close relationship to the emperor. Septimius Severus used Julia Domna’s image to legitimize his dynasty and prop up his sons as future heirs by adopting himself into the family of Marcus Aurelius. Philip the Arab similarly employed Otacilia Severa’s image and titles for dynastic purposes to support the young Philip II’s ascent to imperial power. Galerius elevated his wife Galeria Valeria to legitimate himself as Augustus of the East following the Conference at Carnuntum.


#Methodology

Since literary sources for the third century are scant, this dissertation relies heavily on material culture from 193 to 315 CE. Inscriptions and coinage mentioning the empresses are quite plentiful and thus, it was necessary to create databases in order to perform qualitative and quantitative analyses. The databases also allowed for visualization of the evidence which has proven important for uncovering previously undetected patterns. Julie Langford and I have built a database containing inscriptions securely attributed to empresses with the title of Mater Castrorum and another for Mater Castrorum coin types. Langford built the first database for Maternal Megalomania with the assistance of undergraduate and graduate student researchers.  I have expanded this database to include all the inscriptions dedicated to Otacilia Severa and Galeria Valeria, not just the inscriptions addressing the empresses as Mater Castrorum. The database will be useful in detecting patterns concerning which populations erected inscriptions, portraits, statues, and monuments to the empresses as well as the frequency of particular titles used to address imperial women. Inscriptions were categorized by their type and medium, noting whether they were erected to the empress alone or mentioned the empress within the imperial domus. Thanks to GPS coordinates, we are able to visualize the locations of inscriptions and thus group them according to ancient city, Roman province as well as modern city and country. We are also able to view honorific trends over time thanks to high and low date categorizations and individual columns  devoted to their various official and unofficial titles attributed to the women such as Augusta, Mater Castrorum, Mater Augg, Mater Senatus, Mater Patriae, and other titles.  Dedicants were categorized as military, veteran, civic, individual, non-governmental, or imperial administrator to ensure that we would get the best and most accurate reporting from our dataset. There are, indeed, some issues related to the categorization of dedicators, especially overlapping categories. For instance, a veteran holding a civic priesthood can be classified as both a veteran and civic priest. Because the database allows for only one categorization, in each case, we classified the dedicator according to the first title that they themselves employed. Paramilitary groups like the vigiles could be classified as both military and civic; we chose to categorize them largely as civic since their duties were within the confines of the city. This issue is further complicated with legati Augusti; some supervised legions while also governing provinces and thus choosing between military and imperial administration categories is problematic. For the time being, they are classified as imperial administration. These categories will be updated as the project progresses

---
